you can exercise all you want eat all
the right Foods sleep eight hours a
night if you are not breathing right you
will always be sick
James Nester International bestseller on
breathing as a species we've largely
lost the ability to breathe correctly
James travels the whole world trying to
figure out what went wrong and how to
fix it 99 of people are breathing
dysfunctionally they don't realize the
damage they're doing to their bodies and
brains by being this way look at the way
we sit all day long the way we sleep the
way we eat the modern world is
conspiring to make us sick diabetes
asthma metabolic and autoimmune issues
anxiety even ADHD experts said it is 100
related to your breathing at night
especially really bad breathing habits
are a recipe for disaster which is what
has happened for so many kids today so
if you're a parent and if you can hear
them breathing when they're sleeping
this is a big red flag but I believe
that everybody can become a good breeder
and these steps are free you can do this
while we're seated here so the first
thing is to
carbon dioxide is seen as this poison
why levels over 800 into a thousand can
have serious issues with cognitive and
physical functions I've been recording
our CO2 during this interview it's going
up and if we were to continue working in
here for the next few hours you will
Jesus
I think this is fascinating I looked at
the back end of our YouTube channel and
it says that since this channel started
69.9 percent of you that watch it
frequently haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button so I have a favor to ask you if
you've ever watched his channel and
enjoyed the content if you're enjoying
this episode right now please can I ask
a small favor please hit the Subscribe
button helps this channel more than I
can explain and I promise if you do that
to return the favor we will make the
show better and better and better and
better and better that's the promise I'm
willing to make you if you hit the
Subscribe button do we have a deal
[Music]
James
of all the things you could have
committed your life to you could have
committed a decade of work and effort to
you decided to commit it to the subject
matter of breath and breathing
why it was a number of things that
happened and personally professionally
over a number of years I never set out
to write a book about breathing I mean
what a boring subject right until I
started having breathing problems I came
back year after year I was i surf a lot
in San Francisco so I was getting
bronchitis I was getting pneumonia mild
pneumonia it was nothing to worry about
I'd go to my doctor I'd be given a pack
of pills and sent on my way this kept
happening year after year until a doctor
friend of mine
was looking at me we were out having a
drink and she's like I think there's
something going on with your breathing
so breathing you know this is just
something we do automatically it's
nothing I considered she's like oh you
might want to go to a breath work class
and I went to a breath work class and it
completely blew me away on on a number
of levels I was able to get over the
respiratory problems I had I don't write
about this in the book because I didn't
want to make my experience be indicative
of everyone else's experience but all
the issues I had completely went away
100 percent
and so I started looking into this more
just personally what else I could learn
about breathing and how it could benefit
me for athletic performance for sleep
and more and noticed that my health was
changing in all the right ways over and
over again when I was adopting different
habits so that was more than 10 years
ago actually that was probably 12 years
ago and then I started writing about
freedivers started freediving myself and
learning the limits of breathing and how
you can do things that are supposed to
be scientifically Impossible by
harnessing the power of your breath and
that's what really got me interested as
a science journalist so your symptoms
the symptoms you had of what were those
symptoms at the time
I was mouth breathing a lot when I was
working out I was always mouth breathing
when I was jogging I was mild to
breathing doing karate mouth about
breathing surfing and I noticed at night
I could not remember a time when I did
not go to sleep with a huge glass of
water by my bedside I would wake up
numerous times throughout the night my
mouth was very dry
very pasty in the morning I thought this
was completely normal I also noticed
that when I was working out at really
high levels I would start to wheeze a
bit like I could hear myself breathing
and I thought this was normal whenever I
talked to people about it they said oh
welcome to old age this is what happens
when you get older and I didn't think
that that was a good reason to be
breathing so dysfunctionally but it
really took someone else to point it out
for me to understand that maybe there
was a problem there maybe I should fix
it and your friend who was a doctor then
suggested this breath work class you go
to this breathwork class and is it the
one session itself that helped you or
was it the practices you took away from
that session that helped you that one
session completely blew my mind so it
had all of the Hallmarks of flakiness
and new aginess you know all the people
flowing flowing clothes uh there were
some headbands I said good God what am I
doing here there's a lot of this stuff
in San Francisco so I'm kind of used to
it dream catchers all that
and it wasn't until I sat down and
started actually got rid of all of that
all those problems in my brain that were
making me resist really giving myself to
this practice
got rid of that started breathing and I
I read about this at the beginning of
the book but I completely sweated
through my t-shirt was not a warm room
it's quite cold in there sweat through
my t-shirt there's sweat marks on my
jeans my hair was sobbing wet and this
was from sitting in a corner of a cold
room just breathing at this certain
pattern so it obviously released
something in me and when I mentioned
this to doctors I went back they said oh
you had a fever or oh you know the room
was too hot oh you were covered in
blankets all of that was false there was
something else deeper happening and they
didn't understand it from their medical
training so I tried to get answers
elsewhere and that's what I spent years
doing
you spent years doing I mean your your
book on the subject matter comes out
almost a decade later
um
so in hindsight now you have those
answers on why you sweated through your
clothes and why you had that
physiological reaction what is the
answer
I do not have opinions as a science
journalist and I am a filter so uh my
job is to talk to absolutely everybody
and especially when people doctors tell
me oh don't talk to those people they
don't know what they're talking about
those are the first people I'm going to
talk to so I talk to everybody and try
to synthesize what I've learned the
truth according to all of these
different cultures all of these
different ways of learning and put that
in a book that the general public can
understand so I have my own personal
views on it but I try to keep my
personal views out of what I write
and then the sort of next significant I
guess Catalyst event that was an
Inspiration Point for your work was in
2011 as you say you went and covered the
freediving championship in Greece what
did that experience add to the
inspiration Cloud that would then form
the book what did you learn about the
nature of breath from that yeah it's so
funny uh you know as you go through life
there are some experiences that you have
that you have no idea that you are
opening a completely different door and
you're just gonna be walking through
that door for the next decade so that's
what happened in Greece didn't really
know anything about it go out there and
just have my mind blown I mean you have
these people who are at the surface of
the water take a single breath of air
one breath
and dive down 120 meters on a single
breath of air
and come back up five minutes later
and go
and then get out of the way for the next
competitor so you watch them the water
is very clear there right it goes down
visibility is 150 meters you watch them
just
disappear into nothing the size of an
ant and then completely disappear into
the ocean and come back and I said my
God
there's so much we don't know about
breathing and also about the limits of
the human body
I want to learn more about this I want
to experience this as well not diving
down that deep but I want to access more
of what I've been given because I think
we've been sold pretty short on what our
limits are and what we should be doing
and shouldn't be doing but I think our
bodies are much more potential than that
when I was when I was reading through
your book you describe breath as a
pillar of Health
which is a pretty big statement to make
is when we think of pillars of Health we
might think of you know exercise or
um diet but breath hasn't been
considered a pillar of Health I think to
be honest for the first 27 for the first
29 years of my 30 year old life I purely
viewed breath as this thing that just
happens unconsciously that is
inconsequential and it's only in recent
times because your work has influenced
some people very close to me that I
started to second guess that
where do we stand as a society at the
moment when we're talking about the
majority of people in terms of our view
of what breathing is and the role it
plays and then I also want to understand
um why that's wrong because as I said I
thought of breathing as just this thing
that happens and it was it was quite um
unnerving to understand that that view
has potentially been impacted me in
profound ways without me knowing it like
you said I've been pointing at the wrong
thing I've been thinking I need some
pills or I just can't sleep or I've got
in I'm you know
someone might think they're an insomniac
or whatever
but you make the case quite profoundly
that breathing is much more than an
unconscious act that we just
do without thinking about well breathing
is something that just happens and how
wonderful that is that we've evolved to
not have to think about every breath we
take right that would be a real problem
but that doesn't mean we can't take
conscious control of our breathing and
then elicit different effects from our
body so we have adopted habits according
to our breathing from our environment
from the way we sleep from our mouth
structure and more that are not the best
habits to have for breath so the reason
why people spend so much time doing
breath work and rehearsing slower
breathing lower breathing breathing
through the nose is to reset a natural
habit so that you don't have to think
about it I mean I don't want to have to
constantly be checking in on my breath
throughout the day I want that to be
automatic but that takes a lot of time
to get back to that healthy state to
make it unconscious where do we get
these bad habits from and because I
think you know surely my body I'm the
product of you know several I don't know
thousands gazillion years of evolution
surely my body is doing it correctly by
default what is what has changed that is
causing me to do it incorrectly your
body is not doing this correctly by
default what has changed is this modern
environment is conspiring to make us
sick and I don't think that that is an
exaggeration at all if you look at the
way we sit all day long if you look at
the way we work if you look at the way
we eat if you look at the way we sleep
of all the pollution noise pollution air
pollution we're surrounded by this is
why we are so sick it is the environment
the human body is so well equipped to
live a healthy life which is why
indigenous cultures the few left they
don't need to go to a Cardiologist or a
pulmonologist or a dentist they have
straight teeth they breathe perfectly
they don't have all of these problems
that we have today so these are diseases
of civilization the vast majority of
problems we contend with we have created
in the last few 100 years and one of the
problems with breathing is that our
facial structure does not allow us to
breathe in a healthy way anymore and it
did hundreds of years ago and we know
that from the skeletal record
what are some of the um the most common
Modern Problems then that the
environment we live in
um have caused and here I'm talking
about diseases what are the everyday
diseases that you've discovered are
byproducts of
misunderstanding and our bad breathing
habits
show me a list of the top diseases and
they're all related to it even diabetes
who would have thought that the onset of
diabetes could be triggered by poor
breathing habits at night but that is
exactly what researchers have found
because if you are choking on yourself
all night as so many people do
oh
you aren't resting you aren't entering
stages of Deep Sleep which means your
body never restores and your body is
going to break down so researchers have
have known this for 50 years their
scientific studies
showing this over and over again so
that's just with with diabetes and
metabolic issues autoimmune issues for
the same reason you're constantly
breathing like this stooped over
you're causing undue inflammation to
your body you're causing nervous system
dysfunction you're in that sympathetic
state which after a while will trigger a
bunch of autoimmune issues so so many of
these things not exclusively are related
to breath they are exclusively related
to diet exercise sleep and breath you
can eat all the right foods you can
sleep eight hours a night you can
exercise all you want if you are not
breathing right you will always be sick
and I've heard that six years ago by a
researcher and believe it more now than
I ever have
at the very start of your book you
you test these things on yourself
you did an experiment
which I found really really interesting
I think that experiment has actually
stayed with me for a long time and then
it's impacted me in the gym a lot every
time I'm on that tread bloody treadmill
I'm thinking about what I read but um
why did you want to do that experiment
on yourself and what was the experiment
I didn't want to do this experiment on
myself I really did not want to do it no
one else was going to do it really there
had never been a human trial of nasal
breathing versus versus mouth breathing
for this amount of time and I was
talking to jayak or Nayak who's the
chief of rhinology research at Stanford
the top top of his field and I said we
know what happens to animals when they
breed this way we know all the
deleterious effects of mouth breathing
on kids on adults on old people on sleep
on athletic performance why can't you
test this let's get a big group of
people and test this he said it'll never
happen we're not going to find funding
and he thought ethically there would be
problems doing it because he knew what
damage could be caused by becoming a
mouth breather and so after all this I
just kind of gave up and then I had an
idea I said well what if I did it and
what if I got one other person we will
sign up we'll sign whatever waivers and
we did it doesn't you know it's just two
people but that was the maximum we were
allotted and he said okay but he had no
money for it so we had to pay for this
experiment at Stanford which was not the
cheapest thing I've ever paid for in my
life
um but I wanted to know I I'm writing
about mouth breathing writing about all
the problems I'm writing about my
subjective experience of how it
transformed my life becoming a nasal
breather I wanted to see that experience
dictated and documented in data by
machines and that's why we did it
and how did it go terribly it was awful
um so just to let let people know uh
this was an experiment in which for 10
days we had our noses plugged up right
and then for another 10 days we had all
of that stuff released from our noses
and we were almost exclusively nasal
breathing everything else in those
10-day periods was exactly the same we
ate the same Foods we walked the same
number of steps we exercised the same so
exactly the same and we did scientific
studies and took a bunch of data before
during and after we were collecting data
three times a day as well looking at
what was happening to our bodies Our
sleep our inflammation and more and we
knew this wasn't going to be pleasant
but I didn't know it was going to be
this bad like it was really not trying
to be over dramatic but it was awful
awful and uh I'm so happy I never have
to do that again at the same time I feel
so sorry for people who do not realize
that their noses are stuffed up who have
been living this way for years and don't
understand that this is their main
source of their issues with migraines
sleep problems and more I can I could I
could see it in you and you described it
as being awful that you're almost
teleporting yourself back to that to
that chapter I could see it in your face
a little little PTSD from that still uh
it was bad
um when you say bad what you mean
specifically is in it was the the first
few days so I did this with uh breathing
researcher and breathing therapist
Anders Olson from Sweden he was the only
person that would do this and he flew
from Sweden on his own dime to try to
understand this he had been talking
about nasal breathing for 10 years right
and so he said okay I want to put this
to the test I want to see if I'm right
or wrong so the first few days were kind
of laughing it was like how bad did you
sleep you know we're comparing we went
from zero snoring to full-on snoring and
sleep apnea within a couple of days and
so we were comparing kind of showing off
how sick we were
but then after about a week we saw three
days ago like I wasn't able to sleep at
night and I was dreading every single
night going to sleep because you're my
mouth was so dry and my sleep was so bad
I was so tired after sleeping nine ten
hours a night I was so tired and and the
data proved that as well so it got
really bad by the 10th day we were in
really bad shape and and again I want to
mention like
so many people especially during allergy
season are plugged up for months at a
time and they don't realize the damage
they're doing to their bodies and brains
by being this way
how many people
are breathing incorrectly
in your view how many people if they if
they went and did
a practice or they had the understanding
that's in your book and that you speak
about do you believe would have better
overall health and well-being
if they made a change to their breathing
by taking simple steps
I believe that everybody can become a
better what is considered a good
breather and these steps are free and
they're available for everybody if you
look at the percentage of the population
who is breathing dysfunctionally I've
heard different percentages from
different people respiratory therapists
who do this all day long to Elite
trainers of Olympians they say 95 to 99
of the people that they see are
breathing dysfunctionally
so it's basically everybody some people
obviously there's a curve to that
there's an asthmatic with panic attacks
that is breathing very dysfunctionally
and then there's an athlete who can push
through the pain and win that
competition but is still breathing
dysfunctionally
so there's a there's an arc to that
we will sit somewhere on that spectrum
and we all do yeah and I'm not a perfect
breather you're not a perfect breather
like it's hard to find a perfect perfect
breather just like it's hard to find
someone that eats perfectly every single
meal that's probably not the person you
ever want to hang out with anyway
you referred to tribes there and um
people that are not living in our
environment and also you know you talk a
lot about breathing as a lost art I'm so
fascinated by I think I spent the last
couple of years really fascinated by how
our ancestors lived their lives and how
they did things you know I was talking
to Dr Daniel Lieberman about running and
feet and muscle strength and all those
things and spoken to so many other
people about processed food and you know
all of these modern sort of misalignment
diseases where we're not living in
alignment with ourselves have have
become a really important part of my
understanding of how I should be living
now breathing has a lost start
what did you learn when you looked back
through history about how people breathe
and
um what did that tell you about how
we're doing it wrong I learned that we
didn't need breath work classes hundreds
of years ago we already had
bodies that were able to breathe in
properly we were living in an
environment that supported healthy
breathing I love lieberman's work by the
way I've learned so much from them
including a lot of this stuff on skells
and and breathing
so I learned a lot a lot from him so you
know people say well how do you know
that we can't go back in time what you
can do is look at indigenous cultures
which is what Lieberman and so many
other people have done and they found
they don't have problems with their feet
they don't have problems with their
backs they don't have heart disease they
don't have asthma why is it that
Mennonites this is these are these
groups in the U.S that live this very
traditional lifestyle right so some
people say that asthma is is genetic so
Mennonites and Quakers who aren't around
any technology right
they have 0.5 percent of their
population has asthma meanwhile in the
U.S 10 of the population has asthma so
obviously the environment has so much to
do with our health and it absolutely
affects our breathing for all the things
I mentioned earlier how are you sitting
how are your stress levels how are you
sleeping how are you working out all of
these things will weigh upon how healthy
you are able to breathe and so the in
the context of the modern world so if we
didn't need breath work you know a
couple hundred years ago the
introduction of things like pollution I
understand but all their everyday things
like the chair I'm sat in right now and
the way that I work every day that have
impacted breathing and then the
modalities like asthma and these other
things absolutely yeah and we could go
through a few of these things so
when you're sitting as I said eight
hours a day I try to stand at the
standing desk as well you are inhibiting
your ability to breathe properly so I'm
sitting forward in this chair right now
even if I wanted to take a deep breath
it's really hard I have to struggle to
do that
because my diaphragm which is right
underneath the lungs is unable to
descend properly to allow for that
proper inhale give me an example of what
the diaphragm is sure the diaphragm is
this umbrella shaped muscle that sits
underneath the lungs the lungs are just
like two balloons they don't inflate
themselves they need the diaphragm to
come down it creates a vacuum and air
comes into the lungs when we exhale that
diaphragm pushes up and pushes the air
out of the lungs so that's how we
breathe it's not the lungs doing the
work the lungs are just these fleshy
bags right it's that diaphragm
descending creating a vacuum air comes
in and that diaphragm ascending lifting
back up and pushing that air out so you
need proper diaphragmatic movement in
order to breathe properly when our
bodies aren't allowing us to do that
when you're sitting on a bus or sitting
on a plane for 12 hours at a time and
you're seated like this
you aren't able to breathe properly that
means you're only breathing into your
chest you weren't accessing all of this
other area if you're just breathing into
your chest you have to breathe way more
breaths the reason is so much of that
area you're bringing that air into does
not participate in gas exchange it does
not soak up that oxygen that's in the
air so most of us spend most of our days
like this
slumped over in the chair like yeah
and breathing like that we can live this
way doesn't mean we're healthy we can
live on three pieces of pizza every day
right we have enough calories to do that
doesn't mean we're healthy so that's
that's the number one thing you can sit
in a chair properly
to breathe right but it takes some
effort if you look at indigenous
cultures again look at how they're
sitting look at their spines like it's a
beautiful thing they're sitting in a way
that is conducive to proper breathing
any statue any ancient statue look at
the posture the posture is for people
that can't see this right the poster is
straight up or it is it is it is it is
straight up but relaxed at the same time
it is having a straight spine I now once
you learn this it just it makes you
neurotic after a while but that's the
first thing is to really notice how
you're sitting when we get stressed out
when we're answering emails we're over a
laptop I spend so much of my life doing
this then we also have a stress response
which further reduces our ability to
breathe properly we start to breathe too
much we start holding our breath and we
breathe too much our posture is like
this so everything is conspiring to make
us really poor breathers and this isn't
some far-flung hypothesis I have it's
it's basic biomechanics of how the body
works
the diaphragm part's really interesting
to me because the
you refer to and many people refer to
the diaphragm as the second heart
because it kind of it's a muscle that is
uh autonomous to some degree like the
heart I don't control my heart I can
control my diaphragm but when I don't
think about it it kind of controls
itself is that accurate yeah absolutely
it's it's an autonomic function but by
taking conscious control of that
diaphragm you can't control your heart
you can control your blood flow and that
the diaphragm also does an incredible
amount of work pumping blood into the
heart and pumping lymph fluid throughout
the body so when you see people only
using five ten percent of their
diaphragmatic movement which is
considered normal now just moving the
diaphragm this much they their hearts
have to work so much harder to just pump
blood and their bodies have to work so
much harder to pump lymph fluid which
you need to get rid of all that waste
right the body likes movement the fluids
need to be moving so just by taking a
slightly deeper breath and exhaling a
little more you were able to help your
heart rate out and which is why your
heart rate will start to go down after a
while you're able to help your blood
pressure in some cases you're able to
pump lymph fluid in more just by taking
a slower deeper breath and you know just
look to the Animal Kingdom for your
guidance on this we don't need any fancy
animation to show us what proper
breathing is look at a healthy dog
sleeping look at a healthy infant
sleeping and breathing look at
indigenous cultures how they sleep how
they breathe you can't tell they're
breathing
and that's what healthy breathing is it
should not be perceptible so when a lot
of people hear about healthy breathing
they want to overdo it right they want
oh yeah I feel great
if you look at a monk or someone who's a
master breather you cannot tell their
breathing it's so soft and so subtle
that it just comes in and comes out that
is someone who is balanced their nervous
system is balanced their breathing is
balanced
are these habits we can learn you talk
there about posture and about the
diaphragmatic
um movement and at what percentage of
the diaphragm we're we're kind of using
and how much that's filling our lungs
are these habits we can learn absolutely
because even posture feels like it's
like it's quite hard to sit like that if
you start paying attention to your
breathing your posture is going to get
better it is hard to be leaning over
like this and take take a huge breath
look what happens to your posture so
form dictates your breathing your
breathing dictates your form that was
written in the Dow like 1200 years ago
so once you learn how this proper slow
deep breathing Works your posture by
virtue of that will get better would you
recommend because a lot of people do
work in offices I'm one of them I spend
a lot of my days sat down 10 hours
looking down at a screen what would you
recommend for for us well I think the
science is pretty clear on standing
desks uh convertible standing desks are
really helpful to sit for part of that
time to stand for part of that time
whenever I'm on the phone which is often
I'm standing so I just press a little
button and I go back to standing when
you're standing you're opening up your
chest these intercostals you're opening
up to allow yourself to naturally
breathe deeper breaths so you can do
that sitting but you just look kind of
corny like sitting like this all the
time so I think that that's a good hack
I think that the science is very clear
that every couple hours I'm not very
good at this I'm trying to get better go
for a walk for 10 minutes take your call
while you're walking around to reset
things but that's just one of many
different components looking at the
posture and its relationship to healthy
breathing
the um when I was reading through your
work and I was thinking about having
this conversation with you this is
really
I guess slightly obvious but I also can
understand how it's a stupid question
um which is if nose breathing is so
beneficial for our health and well-being
then why do we have the capability of
breathing through our mouths
do you see what I'm saying great
question how wonderful that we have a
backup system in case anything happens
to our noses that we don't suddenly die
right so you can drink through your nose
right it's really hard to do that but
you can and it goes down to your stomach
but that doesn't mean it's the right
thing to do just like with breathing
again look at the Animal Kingdom look at
a cheetah running at 100 kilometers per
hour how is it breathing
and then out through its nose the only
time that a horse starts breathing
through its mouth is when it's sick so
that is a sign that it's sick a horse
running at a Sprint is breathing through
its nose this is what we this is the
organ we are designed to breathe through
and no one who has studied rhinology
would argue otherwise there are 30
different functions that the nose does
for breathing so not only does it help
filter air out and heat air but it helps
capture moisture about 40 percent more
moisture so you don't have to constantly
be drinking water when I see people
jogging and they're breathing through
their mouth and they're carrying like
four different water bottles they
wouldn't need those water bottles if
they just learned to breathe through
their noses because the body is designed
to capture that moisture that's what the
nose does and all those hairs do and
then there's nitric oxide which is this
miraculous molecule that plays in a
central role in vasodilation circulation
and more and it kills viruses and
bacteria this all happens in the nose
this does not happen in the mouth
nitrous oxide is is only happens in the
nose nitric oxide yeah we get six six
times more nitric oxide just breathing
through the nose six times more wow and
if you because of all of these different
tissues they they release nitric oxide
and there is some science showing that
this boost of nitric oxide can
significantly help us defend more from
viruses and bacteria including colds so
breathing in and out through the nose
there's a lot of work in nitric oxide
and covid Rehabilitation who knew we can
produce so much of it in our noses and
if you hum you can increase that to 15
fold
so humming you're gonna annoy everyone
if you do this increases that nitric
oxide 15 fold and there was one study
that showed this guy completely got rid
of his rhinitis just by humming for
about 10 minutes four times a day
so these are simple tricks you can do
they're free available for everyone the
humming also helps to calm the body down
because we have the vagal nerve right
vagus nerve Bagel tone is right along
here so when you hum
you're sending signals to the vagus
nerve and you're calming your body down
what what is humming doing humming is
stimulating more nitric oxide and
allowing it to break free from all of
those tissues so you hum in your nose
yeah and you can feel the vibration
there so somebody sent me this device
like three months ago that they now have
a device for people who don't want to
hum that goes on your nose and hums for
you if that's going to help you hum you
can do that but I've found it's just
kind of easier to pick a song you like
and hum that when you talk about the
common colds and you know flu and
infection did you see a clear
correlation between people that had good
breathing habits and the common cold and
bad breathing habits and there have
never been like a huge study done done
on that on humming and nasal breathing
and the common and there never will be
right no one's No One's Gonna fund that
I can say anecdotally absolutely and if
you look at the biochemistry if you look
at the physiology if you look at all the
functions of the nose you can deduce
it seems very clear to me that you will
be susceptible less to certain viruses
certain bacteria by breathing in and out
of of your nose
you mentioned covid there your book came
out right as covid hit which is
unbelievable timing yeah yeah
some people thought I'd plan that
somehow it was interesting um the first
week the book came out somebody
criticized it for taking advantage of
this pandemic without bothering to
notice the book was printed and in
warehouses six months before anyone had
ever heard the word covid you know and I
worked on this book for years and years
and years so yeah lockdown in the U.S
was in March this book came out in June
right on the heels of it which was
absolutely
bizarre to me and all of the research
looking into breathing patterns looking
into nasal breathing how that can help
rehabilitate people with long covid and
with acute cases of covid is very solid
and I still don't see anybody talking
about this
one of the most important things that
we're not talking about as it relates to
things like covid from from your
research and your book I think the most
important well it depends on on Whose
stock people in breath work communities
have been talking yogis have been
talking about Buddhists have been
talking about it so I think in Western
medicine
you come in and your doctor assesses
your health listens to your heart maybe
looks at your cholesterol they're not
looking at your breathing and this is
especially important for kids I cannot
tell you how many hundred thousands by
now of parents have written me their
kids are on all these different pills
none of them are doing anything they
have ADHD they're flunking out of school
and I am astounded that more
pediatricians and more doctors aren't
looking into this because so many
millions of kids are suffering because
of their breathing is is so terrible
it's been so terrible for so long that
their their bodies are now rebelling
against them and why are kids breathing
in such a way because you think you
think of a kid you think they I think we
form these bad habits when we're adults
or later on in life but to thought the
thought that a kid
has developed such a bad habit somewhere
it's quite hard to take see all roads go
back to those skulls right and that
anthropology and those ancient cultures
right so these kids are not able to
breathe well because their facial
development is is so retro nathic which
means it has grown so far backwards that
their airways aren't able to open up
enough so whenever they put their heads
on a pillow
that's what it sounds like so it is a
problem with facial development that we
did not have hundreds of years ago and
you can see this I spent years looking
at ancient skeletons and they did not
have these problems so right out of the
gate were messed up right arts or facial
function is messed up and it's making it
harder for us to breathe add on top of
that pollution
bad sitting habits bad breathing habits
and you have a recipe for disaster which
is what has happened for so many kids
today so I have to ask why that facial
um issue started and how that is being
passed on because in my mind Evolution
or de-evolution or whatever the word
would be in this case stopped I thought
we stopped changing and evolving because
we are no longer being selected out of
the gene pool
there is no stopping Evolution Evolution
means change throughout time
it does not mean progress
so when people use the word Evolution to
mean we're evolving uh better and we
have these better capabilities that's
not what the word actually means is
change throughout time and we can change
For Better or For Worse
and for the past few hundred years we
have been changing for the worst this is
not my opinion this is a scientific fact
so it comes back to that question why
why would an animal change for the worse
and it goes back to my answer the
environment we can trace the exact point
that our facial structure started
growing in this deform way to make us
less susceptible to healthy breathing to
that changed in such a way to make us
such poor breathers and that point is
right when industrialized food came into
different cultures so that happened at
different times came in first to England
and France then it spread to Germany
then is spread to you know Scandinavia
then it spread through the rest of the
world you can see in a single generation
of eating industrialized Foods things
that were canned things that were
bottled things that were baked things
with sugar in it single generation 50 of
the population will have crooked teeth
that didn't have it before crooked teeth
are indicative of having a mouth that's
too small for your face your mouth grows
too small teeth have no or to grow in so
they grow in crooked what else is a
problem with having a mouth that's too
small for your face you have an airway
that's too small you aren't able to
breathe properly so we can see that
exact point and researchers have done
this for decades and decades and I've
seen these skulls before after
industrialization and the same story
plays out no matter where you are on the
planet so that is what is what has
ruined our faces and that's why we look
so different than we did 300 years ago
two thousand years ago 20 000 years ago
why did our mouths get smaller at that
point because of industrialized food
elicits very little chewing you don't
need to chew very much when you're
eating soft foods so every if you think
about it our ancestors chewed for like
three four hours a day
chewy raw meat bones or Roots uh yeah
think about the foods you ate today well
maybe not you because you're probably
eating
healthy food but the food that most
people are eating everything's soft
takes a few bites is gone there's no
rigorous chewing and if you don't get
that early on in life your skellicature
does not develop properly and your
musculature does not develop properly
and you grow a different kind of face
that makes you much more susceptible to
poor breathing habits does that then
mean that one way we can avoid these
breathing Related Disorders later in
life would be to have our children
eating more difficult Foods when they're
younger
absolutely and if you look at the
reasons why our ancestors all had these
pronathic really strong faces these huge
Airways it's because they were breastfed
for a minimum of two years and after
that they weren't weaned onto applesauce
or baby food they ate Adult food right
there was no such thing as Gerbers back
then a few hundred years ago they went
from being breastfed to eating Adult
food which requires a lot of chewing
that's the main driver behind how our
faces have developed and devolved in the
past
300 years
the point there about being breastfed
for two years why is that consequential
this is where I get into a lot of
trouble here so I want to be very don't
worry I'm gonna do I get in trouble as
well you might trust me
so I want to be extremely clear here I
am a journalist and I go out and talk to
experts in the field these are not my
opinions what I'm telling you what I
have been told by dozens and dozens of
experts and I'm not shaming anyone for
feeding their children any way they want
that's none of my business okay what I
have learned from several experts is the
stress and chewing required for
breastfeeding will help pull the face
out and develop a larger Airway
again I want to be very clear I'm not
shaming modern mothers you're under an
incredible amount of stress
bottle feeding perfectly fine you want
to do that I think it's great but
that stress and and you think about it
like for two years if you're constantly
pulling that face out the face is going
to develop differently right so that
makes sense to me but even if a kid is
is bottle fed which is great if you want
to bottle feed a kid
as long as they're eating healthy food
that they actually chew after that I
believe my personal opinion is you can
develop all of that proper facial
structure and you can also use some
different orthodontic devices to help
push that along and you will be
perfectly fine what is the difference
between the bottle and the nipple like
in terms of what it does to my yeah see
when I when I mentioned we're both going
to get in trouble here uh this is what I
was talking about I will not visually
demonstrate
look it up on YouTube anybody but there
is it's much easier to feed from a
bottle it requires less less stress to
feed from a bottle when you are
breastfeeding it is much more activating
for the infant to have to glom onto the
breast and the nipple goes actually deep
into their mouth almost down their
throat and it requires more chewing
stress we know this okay which is why a
lot of kids when they're given the
choice between the two they want the
bottle because the bottle is easier they
want more food more quickly and and
again I want to be clear just because
you were bottle fed or whatever early on
does not mean you're doomed it's some of
this sounds depressing but I considered
it inspiring and empowering to know the
science behind this so you can fix what
the core issue is and I'm convinced that
kids who are bottle fat can be wonderful
perfect breathers by adopting other
habits beyond that
you mentioned hyperactivity as being
correlatory to breathing
so if you're a parent and you have kids
who are having health issues even if
they don't have health issues look at
how they're breathing at night this is
so important look at how they're
breathing in the day if they're
breathing the vast majority of their
breasts through their mouth you have to
fix that number one they will be much
more susceptible to asthma allergies and
other issues later on in life especially
at night if they are breathing through
an open mouth and if you can hear them
breathing when they're sleeping
this is a big red flag that you better
look into immediately because there will
be so many Downstream issues caused by
that breathing pattern like this is
increased risk of diabetes increased
risk of autoimmune issues increased risk
of asthma ADHD and more so some
researchers this is not my words this is
what they told me they said there is no
such thing as ADHD what that is is sleep
disordered breathing
period really they said it is 100
related to your breathing at night
especially so again that is not my view
this is what they have said
I think that's a bit of an exaggeration
but I don't think it's too far to say
the vast majority of those issues if
your kid has sleep apnea or is snoring
are caused by that they are not sleeping
well if you are not sleeping well what
do you do all day long your body is
trying to stay awake so they're giving
Ritalin to stay awake they're given
sleeping pills to go to sleep those
sleeping pills will make their breathing
worse because they loosen all of the
muscles in here
and they cause more resistance when
they're breathing
so even if kids even if you hear a
slight resistance to it that is cause
for alarm as well I know this seems
overblown like some some crazy warning
but you can there are 500 scientific
references available for free on my
website look at the work by Christian
gimino who is at Stanford for 40 years
he was sounding the alarm in the 70s and
nobody listened to him and people still
aren't listening to this and it is a
serious problem so what's true for kids
is also true for adults but I'll just
cap that off right there
I mean please do not cap it off ever I
prefer when you talk so
um the ADHD point is fascinating to me
because it's been a huge topic of
conversation in society because of the
apparent Rise
um in the disorder but the certain rise
in the diagnosis of the disorder
these researchers and scientists that
believe that ADHD is purely a
consequence of early breathing habits
what evidence have they got for that or
what studies have they done to show the
correlation between how we breathe when
we're at little and our chance of ADHD
when they fix the breathing the ADHD
goes away really for the majority of the
cases offer everybody for the majority
of the cases it disappears
you can look at the studies you know if
you I'm I'm happy to provide those for
you
to me it makes sense it's if you're
struggling to sleep
you are never going to be fully aware
during during the daytime right
and this is one of the reasons why so
many kids get their adenoids taken out
their tonsils taken out and more but
unless you fix the breathing habit you
can do those surgeries and they can be
very helpful unless you fix the
breathing habits all of those problems
tend to come back sometimes even more so
so you're not fixing the core issue in
the core issue is breathing and
breathing retraining breathing habits
ahead of this um conversation you know
we were doing some research and we found
that study that analyzed more than 11
000 children over six years beginning at
six months of age and that revealed that
children sufferings from sleep
disordered breathing had a higher
incidence of Behavioral and emotional
issues such as hyperactivity
aggressiveness depression and anxiety
they have 50 to 90 percent more likely
to develop ADHD like symptoms than were
normal breathers that blew my mind there
it is right there I'm glad that you you
mentioned that and I didn't yeah and
there's there's dozens of studies
showing the same thing over and over and
over
the question then becomes I guess is if
I have ADHD and I'm 30 years old uh yeah
I I think it depends on who you are I
don't think that there's a blanket
prescription or a blanket guarantee on
any of this stuff I think it depends on
what's the root cause of that ADHD we
know in kids it's treated as a
neurological problem right if that were
true then the drugs should work and they
don't right and I believe it's a
physiological problem it's a breathing
problem and that that study is just one
of many that that has espoused that if
you're talking about an adult with ADHD
what I know about adopting healthy
breathing habits you will only benefit
that benefit might be this big or might
completely transform your life right you
will only know once you do it so I don't
feel comfortable guaranteeing anyone of
anything there might be some respiratory
therapists or breathing coaches who will
say absolutely I can cure your ADHD with
these breathing practices that's fine
but I don't think it's the same
prescription for for everybody I know
it'll help though um going further back
at this train of thought then we're
talking about
um exercise and nose breathing at the
very start of this thread of thought and
I have sat here with a few people now I
think it was Peter attia who was talking
to him about VO2 max a subject matter I
don't still fully don't understand but
from what I understood it was the amount
of oxygen we're able to take from each
breath yeah yeah so that's that's a
general measurement of the amount of ox
how efficient you are at taking up
oxygen which is related to breathing but
it's also related to the respiratory
system and how you're able to extract
that oxygen from your lungs into your
bloodstream and it's a good gauge of
General athletic performance it's not
everything and there's been some
pushback against using that as a as a
measurement but but it's a general
General gauge a good tool for that is
there a correlation between our health
outcomes how long we'll live and our
lung capacity or VO2 max and all of that
stuff is there a correlation there so I
had the same question years ago and I
started looking into it and it turns out
that numerous Studies have found found
that the healthier and larger your lungs
are the longer you will live that is the
greatest indicator of lifespan was lung
size and lung Health the greatest
indicator the greatest indicator
according to these studies the
Framingham study looked at 5200 people
over the course of 70 years and they
found that the people who lived the
longest have the largest and healthiest
lung function they even did studies in
which they were looking at people who
had lung transplants so surgically
implanted lungs those who were given
larger lungs lived way longer than those
given normal size or smaller lungs so no
matter how you get these larger lungs
it's better and luckily we don't need to
get a transplant to do this we can
practice healthy breathing we can
practice stretches we can exercise and
this naturally can keep our lung size up
it's very sad when you start looking at
these charts of what happened after
you're 30 you're almost there so get
ready it's a real bummer but your lung
function starts dropping off
very quickly and especially for women
around 50 and 60 your lung function and
your lung size starts shrinking
shrinking shrinking up which means at
the time you need more oxygen more
easily it's much harder to get that and
that's where People's Health really
starts disintegrating and they start
having problems the good news is you can
Stave off this deterioration this
shrinking of your lungs by doing all the
stuff we're talking about by doing
breath work exercise by exercise what is
yoga but stretching
and breathing into this lung and
breathing into that lung so the Yogi's
newest thousands and thousands of years
ago
and he said it almost feels like that
downward spiral is kind of
self-reinforcing and self-fulfilling
because if my lung capacity deteriorates
my movement and my Exercise capacity
will deteriorate which means my lung
capacity will deteriorate which means
I'll move less which it's kind of this
downward spiral right absolutely and
it's
my belief after studying this stuff for
so long that that is the thing you want
to pay attention to more more than
anything else especially as you grow
older your lung function how much air
you can pack into your lungs how long
you can hold your breath all of this is
indicative of your general respiratory
function in your General Health so that
that little hint of using a breath hold
every morning to see where you are
physically and mentally I think it's
good they've used it for thousands and
thousands of years and now it's coming
back this is something that a lot of
these longevity experts aren't looking
into they're looking into nutrition and
exercise they're not looking into lung
capacity we get more energy from breath
than we do from food and drink right we
take 30 pounds of air in and out of our
lungs every single day and so I I find
it interesting they're focused on all
these micronutrients all that stuff's
important right I believe most of it
but from what I know a lot of them
aren't focused very much on their
breathing I want to make sure that I
have something to that I can take into
my own life there for the expansion of
my lung capacity because I'm sold on the
importance of it so
um exercise expands my lung capacity
yeah 15 20 just just by exercising by
virtue of actually if you're a good
exerciser your lung capacity will will
stay up cardiovascular exercise
cardiovascular exercise
and there's ways to access that a little
more if you're dysfunctionally breathing
when you're working out you're not doing
yourself too many favors so you have to
remember those simple basic things you
have to learn how to take a proper
breath then apply that to your workouts
you will see such an incredible
difference once you do this this is what
yoga is good for it's hard to do yoga
without breathing well right you can do
it but by virtue of all those different
poses they're meant to open up your
chest right to expand this area so yoga
cardiovascular exercise with proper
breathing through my nose breath work
practices the start of the day I think
biomechanics the first thing is
awareness to any of this stuff you can
take your hands we can do this while
we're seated here you can put it above
your sit bones here yeah and when you
breathe in breathe very very low and you
want your hands to move out laterally I
don't care what your stomach's doing
moving out laterally so as you breathe
in when you say low you mean in my belly
you want your hands to me moving
outwards okay I don't care what's
happening with your lung I with your uh
stomach I can hold my breath
and move my stomach in and out so when
people talk about a belly breath that's
not what we're doing when your hands are
moving out laterally that means your
diaphragm is descending that's how we
can see if you're taking a proper deep
breath so as you breathe in
you want your hands to be moving outward
and if you take a cloth measuring tape
you can actually measure your progress
this way the next thing you want to do
is take your hands okay take your four
fingers place them on your collarbone
and put this one's very weird place your
middle finger right there so it's only
your middle finger that's touching okay
and we're going to breathe deep then
we're going to move that breath up into
our chest okay
don't move your shoulders
you want to see those fingers naturally
separated okay so this is not a flexing
thing your shoulders stay down like this
just like this fingers on the collarbone
we're going to take a big breath into
our lower abdomen area
move it up
and you want your chest to be expanding
outward the last thing we want to do
take your hands and put them especially
you you need to do this take your hands
put them around your neck yeah I want
you to do that same breath you should
feel zero tension in your neck there's
none of this going on okay it should
feel soft and supple so let's take that
belly to the chest breath
if there's any tension do it again until
there's no tension
okay now try that again keeping your
shoulders down okay do not move your
shoulders up there's none of this going
on you're very soft very relaxed take
your hands above the hip bones when
you're breathing in very deep those
hands should be out like this
like wings yeah okay and you're going to
breathe in deep and those hands should
be moving out laterally
you will start to feel those organs
getting compressed that's good you want
that then you can move it up one more
time so we're going to start low we're
going to move that breath up to the
chest
keep your shoulders down
try it again keep the shoulders down
there you go and those fingers should be
separating so this is something that you
can check in if those hands are moving
out laterally
if those hands are separating on your
chest you're taking a proper
biomechanical breath
and that's what you need to focus on and
you'll notice once you start learning
how to access these different areas you
start applying this to working out and
your performance will tend to go up
you'll be less exhausted at the end
you'll just feel better all around
so we should expect our chest to come
kind of move outwards as we breathe in
you you want to see your chest moving
outwards because most of your lungs the
expansion is in your back but some of
that is going to be happening this is
not a pose that you want to do like this
right you should be very loose very
limber
and when you breathe in you want that
air to fill all the way up there but you
want to start low first that means the
diaphragm is descending most of the air
that is soaked up from the lungs in that
gas exchange happens at the bottom of
the lungs so you want to be able to
access the bottom of those lungs is
there a certain way that I because when
you say you want to start by breathing
at the bottom is how do I know so this
the symptom of me breathing at the
bottom is
it coming out my my sort of what do they
call this my abdomen coming outwards on
the sides that's right
because everyone calls this a belly
breath so people do this with their
belly but you can move your belly
independently of your breathing yeah
this is a way that you can't cheat so a
tape measure is good and if you get an
inch inch and a half that's pretty good
but you can work that up and if you see
really good breathers people have
practiced a lot of yoga and done it the
right way they can have this massive
expansion and this is what ties into
free divers free divers are the experts
at accessing every square inch of their
lung capacity to fill it with air that's
what they do which is why if you ever
see free divers go to one of these
competitions they're short people tall
people fat people whatever they all have
these enormous chests because they've
been able to develop this incredible
lung capacity one of the things that um
I think causes shallow breath is this
kind of constant state of fight or
flight stress anxiety screens social
media and it's funny because whenever
people would have been listening to this
podcast and started how do you talk
about breath and they would realize that
they were probably at that exact moment
doing really shallow
breaths
you talk about these free divers who are
able to extract you know 18
use 80 90 of their diaphragm or more we
you said we used 10 roughly 10 this is
about 10 and oftentimes less than that
the average person what is the
correlation between like stress and
breathing and also I'm talking now about
like the everyday angst of life
so we've talked about the skeleton we've
talked about anthropology we've talked
about biomechanics and posture but
something else that ties into this
you're 100 right is is psychology is
your brain so how you breathe affects
how your brain works affects your
anxiety but your anxiety also affects
how you're breathing so again it's
another one of those circles what
happens so often is when we're at work
we're so sensitized to threats and to
fear that we overreact when something
happens even though it's not threatening
our life we get a nasty email from a
friend or a email from the boss that's
disappointed at the last project you did
and we get stressed out right and so
what what is the physiological response
to stress is
we clench up
we hold our breath
and then we breathe like this
and we hold our breath again and we
breathe like this
you think about
thousands of years ago when we were out
in the Wilds what would we do if there
was a threat approaching you'd hold your
breath to be silent and then you breathe
too much you get respiratory system
ready to either fight it off or to run
away
so we're having the same response in our
day-to-day lives now because we're so
over sensitized to it
so researchers have different names for
this they call it email apnea or
continuous awareness I mean there's an
academic name for it partial attention
syndrome I prefer email apnea easier to
remember no matter what you call it it's
the idea that when you're in the office
place you're breathing dysfunctionally
because of this constant stress Loop and
they've found there were some NIH
studies on this they found that
breathing this way can have long-term
damage to your health high blood
pressure issues all the things we had
talked about metabolic dysfunctions and
more which makes sense because you're
just constantly in this Loop of fear and
threat and stress so the quickest most
effective way way more than drugs to
take control of this stress is to take
control of your breathing and this has
been documented time and time again so
when you notice you're breathing this
way you stop
what I like to do is breathe two breaths
in and then an exhale looks like this
laughs
that resets your respiratory system that
resets your breathing pattern then you
can do a few rounds of that and go back
to very simple five second and five
second out so let's just pretend yeah
you're in line at the airport someone's
cut you off you ordered something at
Starbucks it gave you the wrong you know
all the things that are just drive us
crazy nowadays at that moment
want you to breathe in
pause
breathe in again
let it out
relax yourself a little bit when you're
doing these breaths okay breathe in
breathe in again
and let it out
do that one more time breathe in
a little more subtle let in it again
and let it out
so you did this in very exaggerated way
which is fine but you can do this so no
one can tell you're doing it you can do
it very subtle you probably feel a
little different now than you did before
yeah so much different you can return to
then a slow low rhythmic breathing
pattern from there or whatever makes you
comfortable I like five seconds in five
seconds out also what's beneficial for
people if it's comfortable for them is
four seconds in six out will really
mellow you out and we could try that
right now breathe in
okay first of all slow I should not be
seeing you okay
so we're going to breathe in just very
very lightly we're going to relax here
what does it matter if you see it
because you're trying too hard okay this
is not there is a time and place for the
this is not it okay
okay right so breathe in
two
three four out two three four five six
breathe in two three four out two three
four five six doesn't have to be that
exact pattern but this will trigger all
of that
parasympathetic response in your body
you can see this if you're looking at
your heart rate variability it's amazing
to see the the difference that this
happens just after a few breaths look at
looking at your HRV looking at your
heart rate looking at your stress levels
what is it doing you mentioned
parasympathetic and resetting the
respiratory system but if I you know
what is the parasympathetic and the
respiratory system for dummies what is
that so how you breathe is going to
activate your nervous system function
your nervous system function is going to
activate everything in your body so we
can take conscious control of our
breathing we can't take conscious
control of our heart rate or liver
function or any of that we can take
control of our breathing when we take
control of our breathing we can hack
into our nervous system so you can be in
a sympathetic State just like we were
you take a couple of those double
inhales and exhales what's sympathetic
that is sympathetic state is the act the
fight or flight this is the action part
of your nervous system when you're in
this state you are ready for action and
what happened which is great we want to
be ready for action we want to be ready
to fight or run away from stuff we do
not want to be in this state all day
long anxiety anxiety stress because this
is where autoimmune issues and so many
other problems come from by constantly
staying stressed we want stress we want
to be able to access stress
for short amounts of time then we want
to flip back into this parasympathetic
this relaxing state if you look at once
again animals in the wild you even look
at like a gazelle that's been attacked
you know five minutes later it's just
sleeping so it has a nervous system
that's able to Pivot from one to the
other
unfortunately we live in an environment
where we're always activating always
pushing towards that sympathetic and is
making us sick really really sick so
your breathing is the quickest way of
taking control of acute stress so pills
work okay other modalities work but in
that moment is when you need the most
help and your breathing is the thing
that can get you there
so people that have chronic stress must
have awful breathing absolutely and
they've they've documented that they've
looked at their breathing they've looked
at their carbon dioxide levels and
carbon dioxide is indicative of how slow
you're breathing if your levels are very
low that means you breathe like this
so you're just off-gassing all of this
CO2 and they're always low especially
for anxiety and panic as well they're
always low extremely low you ask someone
with acute Panic or anxiety to hold
their breath this is usually what
happens
[Music]
I'm never doing that again I've seen
this hundreds and hundreds of times so
by breathing slowly you're making them
more comfortable with more CO2 you're
making them more comfortable with their
nervous system function with themselves
which is why this assessment of a breath
hold is very useful and so important
it's not only a diagnostic it's a
therapeutic because while you're holding
your breath you're also in the action of
training yourself to tolerate more CO2
which will calm your body down
and going back to this point about the
parasympathetic and the nervous system
and anxiety why
does having an extended exhale
help with anxiety so you said breathe in
for four breathe out for six why why
does extending that Exhale by two
seconds help with stress anxiety
so if you really pay attention and a lot
of people have problems doing this is
which is why it's helpful for them to
look at their whoop or or whatever you
can place your hand over your heart and
when you inhale
you can feel your heart rate increase
when you exhale
slows down this is how HRV works this is
how it's calculated is the difference in
time on that and the shortest distance
to the longest difference and this is
looking at your nervous system function
respiratory sinus arrhythmia so how you
breathe affects how how many times your
heart beats right so if you're exhaling
which slows the heart rate down more
what's going to happen to your heart
rate
it's going to start slowing down more
and that exhale that slowing down and
telling your body you're in a safe place
that it can relax is what triggers this
response by the nervous system
interesting so it's like tricking them
tricking the body into believing that's
such a simple hack
um and a lot of people they say oh this
can't be true but so many of us have
these wearables you can check it for
yourself and in real time to look at
your heart rate variability changing
your breathing pattern look at your
blood pressure too for many people they
can just switch to their breathing after
a couple of minutes you can see drops of
15 points not for everybody but for some
people 10 to 15 points just by switching
your breathing as you may know this
podcast is sponsored by huel if you're
living under a rock you might have
missed that and he'll has such a wide
range of products now but there is a
great way to try all of them this is the
huel best seller bundle perfectly
curated so that you can try all of the
favorite products and decide which ones
are your favorites the best seller
bundle has a range of meals and bars
including the iconic heel Shaker the pot
and a free t-shirt which if you've got
the free heel t-shirt you'll understand
how well that t-shirt fits I'm not just
saying that it really really is
phenomenal if you've heard me talking
about cure but haven't tried it for some
reason then this is a great option for
you to get to know the range and find
the product that works best for you I've
tried every single heel product in the
boardroom in the development
Laboratories and in my home and there's
a couple of products which have just
revolutionized my life because they meet
the requirements that I'm looking for so
if you're looking to try heal for the
first time and to get into it and to
join the hooligan family I'd highly
recommend you try this out well we we
talked about the pandemic earlier on in
covid one of the big conversations you
must have seen playing out was that
masks are
um bad for us because it's like trapping
carbon dioxide in inside the mask which
is making us sick I even see people
having this conversation right now on
online in the wake of the pandemic
they're saying you know these masks that
we put on kids they've caused sickness
and illness in kids
um carbon dioxide is kind of seen as
this poison
what is your POV on all of this oh man
there's even more controversial than the
whole breastfeeding thing but let's go
there
Okay so
surgeons and Dennis have been wearing
masks for
100 years they're able to function just
fine they wear good quality masks and
they wear them when they need to be
wearing them there are several studies
that support if everyone wears a mask
and if everyone is wearing that mask
properly it does seem to stem some
transmission of covid and other viruses
that's that's the truth
now let's look at the other side has
been telling we've been telling people
that social distancing at least in the
US they after six months of social
distance distancing which absolutely
worked they said no now you can go out
as long as you're wearing a mask did
that do anything to stamp the spread of
covid from what I see no so there's
there's a number of problems most the
mass that people are wearing are
terrible quality they're filled with
chemicals that you are inhaling and
they're causing a lot of health issues
okay that's that's number one second one
is most of us are wearing them
improperly we're not wearing them in the
right way the third one is people feel
this sense of comfort that they're
actually protected wearing this mask
which is not the case in many situations
and this is because I've done my own
research looking at carbon dioxide
levels in indoor environments and have
found these places that we were told
that we could go to and we would be safe
as long as we're wearing masks
completely not the case some of these
places had such high CO2 that it meant
every seventh breath you were inhaling
was someone else's breath backwash was
someone else's exhale
so I don't care how many masks you're
wearing they are not going to stop the
spread of these diseases if you are in
an environment where so much of that air
has been recycled so that's really
interesting to me I've never heard this
before the the idea that the amount of
carbon dioxide in the room you're in
which I guess is determined by how well
ventilated it is has a
relationship with how much recycled air
I take in
how absolutely and this I learned all
this after the book came out I was
talking to a pulmonologist who said you
really need to look into indoor CO2 I
said well why he said that is a good way
of determining how much of that air has
been recycled so I bought one of these
which is a carbon dioxide meter and I've
been recording our CO2 during this
interview Jesus and uh so
um if you are outside it's about
418 depends where you are 418 19 parts
per million CO2 that's healthy right
even though CO2 is going up it's causing
climate change we all know that
but for breathing that is perfectly
healthy
once you get into 800 parts per million
some Studies have found that
sorry it's going when they are testing
people when they're testing students you
see a 20 decline in test results just
from 800 by the time you get to 1 000
you start suffering from things like eye
irritation sore throats other issues so
we're probably breathing in every one in
every 30 breaths that I'm breathing in
is your breath or the cameraman's breath
by the time you get to 2500 you're in
really bad shape one in every 17 breaths
is is a breath you're breathing from
somebody else so we have been told by
authorities that we should only worry
about levels that are up to 5 000 parts
per million that is completely false
there are over 18 studies that show
levels over 800 into a thousand can
potentially cause problems with bone
demineralization kidney calcification
and chronic inflammation and so just
since we've been sitting in this
interview we started off at 700 and now
we're at 1100 and if we were to continue
working in here for the next few hours
this could be up to 1500 1700 which has
been shown to have serious uh issues
with with cognitive function and with
physical function
that's very scary and it it's cause for
a redesign of this studio because I mean
putting on the air conditioning would
that help because that would that would
ignore us recycling the same air unless
that air is is coming in from outside
does that air come from outside
I don't think so I think it's recycled
and uh a really scary study I read was a
lot of schools are at 1500 to 2000
um several studies have found this they
have shown a 50 dick decrease
in test results
when students were exposed to air with
that much CO2 in it 50 decrease in test
results from fifteen hundred to two
thousand I've recorded levels up to four
thousand and five thousand in bars in
subways and more Jesus yeah this isn't
my uh hypothesis either this is
something I was told about about a year
after the book came out and I've seen a
lot of scientific studies since and I
sent some of those to your team just to
show that this isn't something I'm
making up the the ones you sent to my
team I I have um some notes Here I can
pull up
um in one study of 24 employees
cognitive scores were 50 lower and the
participants were exposed to 1 400 PPM
of CO2 compared with 550 PPM during a
working day we're nearly there so I'm 50
Dumber because you've been breathing so
much
I start to I and I highly recommend
nobody get one of these because you go
crazy wherever you are on an airplane
I've uh seen 2700 per million and you
wonder why you feel like crap after a
long flight and sometimes it goes up and
then it comes down because they put in
more oxygen but usually when the plane
is warming up it's 25 2600 which is why
a lot of people just immediately go to
sleep you know I think maybe they're
doing it on purpose to Mellow everyone
out
but if you think about cognitive
function I mean this is a 50 decrease in
test results is insane and to think you
have kids in these schools taking tests
to go into college and all of the air is
recycled I mean it's just when I
mentioned at the beginning of our chat
here
that the modern world is conspiring to
make us unhealthy I think this is an
example and from what I've seen very few
people are paying any attention to this
and it's real you're reading the
scientific studies over there this isn't
stuff that I'm feeding to you
it almost sounds like I'm smoking it
sounds like I'm inhaling
you know because we talk about people
have got a smoke outside to keep us
healthy so we change the laws in this
country so you can't smoke indoors
well at least smoking is fun and it
gives you a buzz right CO2 is you can't
smell it
it's really hard to sense it
it's invisible and yet it's always there
any outside environment you don't have
to worry about it but indoor
environments especially in the buildings
we've created now that don't have
Windows I can't tell you how many hotels
sometimes really nice hotels I go to
open the windows like my God they've
glued the Windows shut right and
overnight I watched this just ticking up
100 points every couple hours and you
wonder why you wake up so feeling so
much worse than you did when you first
came in there
so this is this is real stuff in in a
room like this there's nothing you can
do because the HVAC system has been
designed to just recycle the air over
and over and over again my hunch and I'm
probably wrong about this in the next
few years people are going to start
requiring bosses of companies are going
to require that there be fresh air for
their employees because I think you're
going to see big problems with
performance I mean even just sitting
here now that you know this
so some of that's a placebo effect sure
but I feel great but don't you feel a
little like warm and tired so so take my
word for it do not travel with one of
these it will make you a complete
neurotic I'm doing it because I want to
document it I'm going to be updating
future editions of the book with some of
this information because I didn't know
about this when the book came out but I
think people really need to know about
this and start asking hotels can I open
the window start out before you run an
office can I open the window like it's
that easy you just need to open it a
little bit it makes a huge difference
just opening it a little bit people
can't see this but we sit in a room here
and we like air seal it for sound
reasons yeah so we don't have any
windows in here
um
and we actually move this this is a
replica of my old kitchen which is on
the top floor of this building so the
reason which had this wonderful huge
balcony over there that you could open
the whole side of the the
um that side of the building and walk
outside into the fresh air but we moved
it down here and made this little
chamber because of sound reasons I do
sit in here for sometimes nine hours a
day there's been an occasion a few times
where I've done three podcasts in a day
and I feel that now you've said it I do
feel incredibly fatigued I'm sure it's
because I'm talking and you know having
really you know sort of challenging my
brain a little bit but
I I only I can only wonder if the
studies are correct and there's a 50
variance in my cognitive scores what
would happen if I found a way to get
oxygen into this room
more oxygen in the carbon dioxide out
I promise you'd feel better I'm going to
figure out how much better who knows it
depends on the day depends on the person
I promise you'd feel better I promise
your brain would be operating and
functioning better than it is now we're
not meant to be in four White Walls
trapped inside are we and this is the
misalignment problem never this is that
misalignment problem even a hundred
years ago right every building had
windows that you could open even 50
years ago every build almost every
building had had Windows you could open
but but now the standard protocol is
because it's easier to heat and easier
to cool right you're creating this this
bubble which is why if you go into like
a Walmart one of those stores there's no
windows there's no anything you just got
blue light in this bubble you can
control the the environment much more
easily but what is it doing to People's
Health you know uh so this is I'm the
guy
that asked for a hotel room does it have
a window and you get really funny looks
and until you start traveling with one
of these and start reading these studies
and you realize how important it is so
interesting one of the things that I
that I've really taken from this is when
I wrote my book um I always go to the
Jungle
to write I literally write the book in
nature I've just realized that I'm
actually increasing my cognitive
um performance by going and sitting down
by Lake every year and writing versus
doing it inside an office so when I
reflect on tasks that require real
cognitive performance honestly like
having an interview conversation or
writing a book or any sort of deep sort
of intellectual cognitive tasks it's so
important that those rooms and those
spaces are well ventilated right and the
right light
those those two things I think are very
important and I think we're going to see
so much of this changing in our culture
soon because people are going to ask for
it and they're going to feel the
difference so there's a whole bunch of
different reasons why you're thinking
more clearly it's not just the lack of
CO2 right in the environment it's the
natural light your nature itself is just
so inspiring and relaxing but this is
one component of it without a doubt
I'm shocked that nobody has ever told me
this before I've never heard about that
ignorance is bliss like if I haven't
done this but we both feel energized and
ready to roll but I'm the type of person
that would rather be empowered by
information I like when people turn the
lights on because we go through our
lives
um misdiagnosing the problems we're
dealing with and so for me knowledge is
power because of course I've sat in this
chair for you know a long time and
to know that there's a potential to
potentially increase my cognitive
performance when I'm doing a
conversation just by finding a way to
get oxygen into this room is is profound
without a doubt I found Advantage I
ensure that that will happen
in the morning when you do this
diagnostic of holding your breath so you
get to the hotel room you do this
diagnostic you hold your breath do you
time on a stopwatch yeah no time in on
my watch so what this is is you can call
it a bolt score body oxygen level test
you can call it a control part call it
whatever you want all it is is you take
a breath in
breathing
you take a calm breath in okay and I'll
tell you what it is and then we'll maybe
do it which will make for terrible
podcast time you guys can just snip it
out but we're just going to take a calm
breath not a big breath calm breath in
to that point where it just stops when
you're exhaling you don't push the air
out it just naturally stops that neutral
point okay just take it we'll just
practice this right now take a breath in
just let the air out
there will be a point where it just
naturally stops yeah that's when you
start the timer okay on that neutral
hold so you just take a breath in
and breathe out I'm not going to tell
you when I'm going to do this so you
don't take an extra big breath and
breathe in again
breathe out to neutral
hold your breath hold it
as you're holding your breath the first
point at which you feel resistance that
means a swallow that means your
diaphragm
starts convulsing gently that means you
feel a buildup of pressure at the back
you have to be honest with yourself this
is not a maximum breath hold test
this is the very first point that you
feel
some palpable discomfort
then you go back to normal breathing so
you won't be doing yourself any favors
if you're cheating past that threshold
okay yeah so good so what you want to
get to is 40 seconds and when you return
to breathing the way that you know
you've gone too far is when you go
yeah your return should be come
you're not seeing me return okay there
is no effort so these are good gauges to
know that you pushed it too far okay so
what you want to be going for
is 40 seconds or more to be holding your
breath and you've got 40 seconds I think
you pushed a little too far but um I was
waiting for that point of just feeling a
little bit uncomfortable and then
most athletes even Elite athletes get to
20 seconds when they first start doing
this and they've trained themselves to
push through the pain they compete and
they win but their bodies are not happy
which is why so many athletes Peak and
then they're a complete mess after they
stop competing that this happens with
football players this happens with
baseball players and more
what most people do is about 15 seconds
15 seconds 15 seconds you would be
surprised especially older people
especially people of respiratory
problems as I mentioned before people
with asthma and panic about three to
five seconds if they have severe asthma
and panic so you just start to
understand how dysfunctionally their
breathing is their CO2 tolerance their
ability for their lungs to extract
oxygen their nervous system and more
just because you got a low score
that is just a diagnostic and it's a
starting point to improve your breathing
this is not a competition do not compete
with yourself we can get to stuff that
is very competitive if you'd like but
this test is just to tune in to how your
body is responding and another warning I
want to be very very clear about do not
take one number and think you're good to
go
this changes in the morning changes if
your sleep is bad changes if your sleep
is good changes after you eat and more
so you take these throughout the day
maybe three times a day and after a week
of recording that number you average it
that's your number that you're working
with does that make sense perfect sense
so so take it at night take in the
morning take it at noon
and just put it in your phone and then
at the end of that week you'll have your
your bolt score is what they call it
Patrick McEwen calls it that
can't stop looking at your carbon
dioxide Monitor and the more I said it
did we just tick up here yeah I wish
this was like a stock meter we'd be in
good good shape you know you mentioned
asthma there um the
I mean my my perception of asthma I
don't suffer from asthma so I don't know
a ton about it I've never no point in my
life if I've been forced to learn about
it or has my curiosity led me there so
far but when I my understanding of
asthma is that people are born with it
and then they're given medicine
that is the General accepted
understanding of asthma and it's wrong
so if some people are naturally
predisposed to have asthma but that is
not a life sentence of asthma and the
idea that a three-year-old a friend of
mine his kid has asthma is given
albuterol it's given all these different
drugs they're taken as adenoids they're
taken out as tonsils no one's looking at
his breathing I asked my friend I said
how does your kid breathe at night he's
like oh he snores all night long with an
open mouth how does he breathe in the
day his mouth is constantly open nobody
mentioned that nobody mentioned that so
I don't go for unless you've got a
genetic neurological disease right I
don't go for this argument that diseases
that come on that are diseases of
civilization that we are stuck with
these diseases our whole life we
certainly know that's true with diabetes
who thought that diabetes is actually
reversible type 2 diabetes is reversible
by adopting a different diet it is
there's a company called virta and this
is what they do they reverse diabetes
the same thing is true for asthma and
anxiety that's my belief at minimum you
can reduce the symptoms
if it really works out well you won't
have any symptoms at all and I can say
this now because I've talked to dozens
and dozens and dozens of people who
suffered through asthma for decades they
weren't able to go outside and play as a
kid they had to stay indoors they had to
stay locked up their breathing was
terrible who now have no symptoms of
asthma by taking control of their
breathing seems impossible there's a
number of different clinical trials
showing that the effects of healthy
breathing showing exactly what these
effects of healthy breathing can do for
asthmatics not three-year-olds your
friends three-year-olds yeah can you
play out that story what did what did
that what was the end of that story he
called me up he's like
you know a bit about breathing a little
bit you know what what can I do for you
he told me what was going on he's like
they're taking out their adenoids
they're taking out this kid's tonsils
he's three years old taking out the
kid's tonsils at three and adenoids uh
because they think that he you know that
is the root
cause of of his asthma this will allow
him to breathe better but what they
don't realize what they didn't mention
as I mentioned earlier if you just take
out adenoids and tonsils but don't fix
the underlying breathing dysfunction all
those problems come back this is true
with asthma this is true with sleep
apnea this is true with snoring and more
so you have to fix that core issue so I
hooked him up with a very well-known
breathing therapist who and he's now
this just happened last week I said I'm
not going to argue with your doctor and
your surgeon maybe your kid needs all
these things taken out immediately I
will argue with the comment that he's
going to be on oral steroids and
bronchodilators for the rest of his life
I I said I don't think he's starting off
on the Good Foot at three years old so
he's now and I'll let you know how it
goes but if what happens to him happens
to the hundreds and hundreds of other
people I've heard from you can reduce
the symptoms and in some cases reverse
them entirely you mentioned tonsils
it just perked my curiosity because
thinking back through my childhood every
you know so many people have their
tonsils taken out yeah and now I reflect
on that through the frame of like
misalignment and ancestors and stuff I
go why would we be cutting something out
of our body
um
that must be a misalignment problem of
sorts I the that must be a symptom of
the environment we live in not being
right for the human body that's my guess
why would a part of the human body
that's taken millions of years to evolve
to this certain function just all of a
sudden be of no use in the past 40 years
you have to start to ask that question
so what is the root cause of those
inflamed adenoids and tonsils is it the
fact that they are there and that's the
problem maybe for some people
genetically right that that could be the
issue but what's causing that
inflammation
you have to answer that question first
before you're going to fix it and just
going into a three-year-old to their
mouth and starting to rip things out I
my personal opinion is that that's a
really bad idea I would go through a
bunch of different methods to see if you
could improve the core condition first
before you revert to that surgery is
great I know people who have had their
breathing absolutely transformed by
doing nasal surgery it works wonderfully
for so many people but I would try to
see what you can do with your natural
body first
interesting I told you my partner she um
she's got I think she's got like her
deviated symptom or something which
means that breathing you can always hear
a breathing through her nose
pretty much all the time especially when
she sleeps
kind of something when she goes 50 even
you know she'll wear to be fair she
started wearing mouth tape I wanted to
talk to you about this she started
wearing this thing called Maya tape
which goes around her lips and has a
hole in the middle yep
um
but that having that myot tape around
her mouth when we looked at her whoop
scores in the morning really
interestingly her heart rate was flatter
than ever
so usually what you'd see in our heart
rate is kind of these like spikes
upwards throughout the night so
sometimes it might Spike up to 60 or 70.
but with the with the mouth tape around
her lips key which kept it kind of keeps
your mouth closed throughout the night
her heart rate super flat her wake
events down her sleep efficiency up
I hear this every day really I mean yeah
this is the the beauty of nasal
breathing what the brain wants is a
consistent fluid signal it gets that
signal from your breathing so there's a
study I'll send you guys on this that
the clock the Master Clock of sleep and
of the brain at night is that cyclical
deep easy breathing pattern this is what
the body doesn't want to have to fight
and defend itself when it's sleeping
this is it's time to rest and restore
and grow right if you're constantly
waking up what's that doing the body has
to stop what it's doing the repair
mechanisms and address the threat over
and over and over and that's what's
happening when people are struggling to
breathe
breathing like that so this doesn't
shock me at all this is exactly what
happened to me this was my same
experience and it's the experience that
hundreds of people have had and they've
sent me their sleep scores for some some
reason showing their heart rate
variability showing their uh how much
more deep sleep they're getting and
showing how rested they are in in the
morning so no matter how you get to
nasal breathing if it's by force of will
some people can just will themselves I
think that's awesome that's the greatest
way of doing it if it's a piece of tape
that's what I like using Mayo tape's
fantastic it's been around for a long
time and it takes away some of the
paranoia that people have with first
taping their mouth it's especially good
for kids you don't want to tape a kid's
mouth the smile tape just sort of it
provides a gentle reminder to keep your
mouth shut at any time you can talk you
can breathe through your mouth but it's
it's just gently reminding you to keep
your mouth shut I think it's great some
people use chin grass whatever you want
to use but breathing in and out through
your nose at night has so many benefits
your girlfriend has seen it millions of
people have experienced it now and it's
free and easy available for everybody
it's just it's profound and you know
this this whole discovery of breath and
sleep in the two-way relationship has
just been so Illuminating for me and
that's hugely part of the reason why I
wanted to have a conversation with you
to get that message out out there
um the perfect rhythm of breathing there
was this fascinating thing you talked
about that there is a perfect Rhythm to
breathing
which is it was quite spooky reading
about it what is the perfect Rhythm to
breathing in
depends on who you are I've learned a
lot more about this as well but a good
first place to start
is this five to six seconds in five to
six seconds out you can get more geeky
after you hit that I used to call this
5.5 I write about this in the book with
5.5 seconds in 5.5 seconds out that's
5.5 breaths per minute that's what
researchers found to be really the most
beneficial but then I got so many
inquiries and emails and letters from
people saying you know I'm into the slow
breathing but I can't hit that half
second and it's driving me crazy and
I've been trying for two weeks I'm like
good god what have I done here so I'm
now telling people five to six seconds
is fine you don't have to worry about
that half seconds being off anything in
that range but what I've learned since
this book has come out that tall people
six foot six one and above should be
breathing even slower larger lungs
diaphragm has more time to descend so
around four and a half
breaths per minute so that's about eight
seconds and eight seconds out even
slower and for kids they naturally need
to breathe more so you want to start a
kid off at
start at three and three out just
starting there and working up to that so
this is a general guide that will work
for most people a good launching spot
but once you get there and you're
comfortable for that you can actually
view in real time your HRV to find your
perfect perfect Rhythm because it varies
a little bit for most people
so slow is better
so if you're taller yes but but not
necessarily for some people who have
Panic anxiety who don't have a very good
CO2 threshold
you have to start with two and two out
just doing that
once you get comfortable with that let's
go three and three out
four and four out right and you find
what's most comfortable for you it's
wonderful being in the world of
wearables where you can actually see
where your body is responding most to
my girlfriend does a lot of um that kind
of it's almost I can almost describe it
as like a psychedelic experience
um is that what they call Inner the the
inner fire stuff or is that the
holotropic I don't really know the
difference between the two but that when
you do the breathing breathing
ceremonies that almost it was almost
like my ego dropped away the first time
I did it I felt so emotional
the first time I did it not in a not in
like a sad like a sad way I just could
see things a little bit more clearly in
my life the first time I did one of
these breath work sessions with her and
I felt the need to apologize to a bunch
of people
because I just I'd had an argument with
someone that day about something small
and I just felt it was almost like my
ego had just like dissolved or something
what's going on there what is that you
know because it's all people are
prescribing this as a cure for like
mental health and Trauma and
well I could tell you what's going on
biologically I could tell you what's
going on psychologically psychically and
more we'll start with the biology
a lot of these very vigorous breathing
techniques which I would strongly
suggest people figure out your breath
Foundation before you go on to these
don't just jump into this stuff
everything we've talked about nasal
breathing slow breathing proper
biomechanics if you figure out all that
you will get so much more out of these
more vigorous breathing exercises so a
lot of these have you breathe very fast
sometimes through the mouth and you may
be saying well I thought you just said
we shouldn't be breathing through the
mouth for these short exercises it's
perfectly fine and you breathe that way
to specifically elicit a stress response
in your body that you are creating it's
the same thing with ice baths right
those aren't relaxing they cause a
stress response so when you're breathing
pranayama Kundalini holotropic you are
stressing your body out
and then you're learning how to use your
breath to calm your body down
right because all of these breathing
techniques you
and then you hold your breath and then
you breathe slow and then you go back to
and then you hold your breath so you are
learning how to take control of your
nervous system function and stress and
so that stress you're compacting into
this exercise so you don't carry it
around with you the rest of the day like
I do and so many other people do so you
go there you blow a fuse and then you're
able to be chilled the rest of the day
so biologically what's happening to your
blood flow when you're over breathing
you are inhibiting blood flow to your
brain people I've heard this in breath
work classes people say the more you
breathe the more oxygen is getting to
your brain that's why you're getting so
high the opposite is happening you're
inhibiting blood flow right now if we
were to over breathe and
yeah you're gonna feel light-headed
you're going to feel some tingling in
your fingers that's not from an increase
of blood circulation but a decrease
so you can breathe into a state in which
you have 40 percent less blood flow to
your brain by over breathing holotropic
is classic you start feeling all kinds
start going like this that's from all
the ionized calcium being glommed on
with albuminum so all of these and lack
of CO2 so this is a classic response
something some breath work people say
it's because you're going back in time
and you're becoming a bird and all
that's beautiful if you want to believe
that but what is actually happening to
your body is that we're losing that
calcium is being sucked up and that CO2
is being inhibited so that vasodilation
is happening and it's causing you felt
that I felt it too it's it's freaking
when it first happens but it's
completely natural and it comes back
when you hold your breath or you breathe
more slowly I only knew I was doing that
because of a photo so they took a photo
of me while I was doing the breath work
exercise and my my and we're in the air
I didn't put them there and my fingers
were curled like a crap it was like that
was like that whoever's running that
breathwork is doing the right thing yeah
because you want to get to that state if
you're ready for that state so that's
what's happening to to the brain and the
body you were denying yourself oxygen
you were stressing yourself out so that
you can live without that stress after
that class sorry so how is it getting
the stress out of me though the same way
that a cold bath is
the same way that going to a gym for a
half an hour or an hour you're working
getting the stress out the same way of
going to a yoga class for an hour like I
feel so relaxed right this is
compounding that stress it's stressing
out your physical body and your brain
it's really pushing it so that you can
be reacquainted with what a threat
actually is right you're not over sensed
so when an email comes in from a friend
and they're being kind of pissy at you
you don't completely lose your top right
so I never want to talk to you again and
I think that's one of the reasons why
after that class you just went whoa I
have a better perspective on what stress
is how I should be treating other people
around me and how my brain should be
feeling that relaxed feeling that you
have so it's harder to quantify
psychologically especially psychically
or spiritually what's happening as a
very personal experience however I will
say having done a lot of this intense
breath work you know this vigorous
breath work I've seen people absolutely
transformed by it
um
they do it one time then they come back
the second time they're a little better
at it and they get rid of a lot of
luggage psychological luggage people
have go through some real stuff when
they're doing it I think it's beautiful
because this is something that we're
doing completely naturally with our own
bodies that we have access to there's
nothing exogenous about it right you
know this is something that that we're
commanding inside our nervous systems so
that's something I think needs to be
explored a lot more I tried numerous
times to get into an MRI machine I want
to do blood work I did one study which
was not in this book in the hypoxia Lab
at San Francisco one of the oldest
hypoxia labs and have freaked out the
researchers so much that they really
didn't want to be a part of it so um
because my hands did that thing and they
were pulling blood and my CO2 was so low
that you know they wanted to put me into
the ER I said no no I feel great I said
this is what it's supposed to be doing
but they want to see everything
consistent all the time right they see
these big dips and CO2 they see this
stress they associate that with serious
illness they don't realize when you
bring it on yourself it's something that
you can help to master and and so I hope
that more research will will look into
what happens to the brain during these
vigorous breathing exercises because not
a lot has been done but I know it's very
beneficial for people and there's been
several studies showing just how
beneficial it is for depression for
anxiety even autoimmune issues and more
of all the things we've discussed what
is the most important thing that we've
missed that is pertinent to breathing
Health well-being and you know daily
practices what is the most important
subject matter that that we've missed in
this conversation
I don't think it's necessarily that
we've missed anything I think it's the
importance of sort of doubling down on a
point of trying to make a few times is
you don't need to pay for this stuff you
don't need to read a bunch of different
scientific articles to know that breath
is a healing and very nourishing
modality this is something that's
available to us all day long all night
long so you can just focus on these
simple things get good at those simple
things and work up from there ultimately
I would love if people finally were able
to work up to go to these big breath
work powerful sessions because I don't
know anyone that's gone to one of these
and hasn't really gotten something out
of it I think you're oh yeah I went to
your your living proof of that right now
I'm an ultimate skeptic as well as as am
I that's the nature of of my job so just
adopt these these simple things and I
will say a final word breathing
dysfunction is a serious problem
especially with kids especially for
adults as well so take this seriously
fix it and I think you'll really see the
benefits from that you'll hear in part
because you're doing a BBC Meister
series aren't you my team told me yes
which is very exciting so that Maestro
series have you written it yet do you
know what it's I am in the midst right
after this okay okay write it up yep and
I'm presuming it's going to be on some
some of the subject matter we've
discussed it it will be it it's a basic
guide and toolbox of exactly what to do
and when and how to improve these
conditions but it also contains 90 of
this book was thrown out right because I
didn't want to have a 600 page book so
I'm able to slip in all this other stuff
that was thrown out and some of this
more mystical some history but a lot of
science as well James I I'm I could talk
to you forever about this I really
really could such a that your way of
articulating the points and the research
you've done is so captivating but I can
see our carbon dioxide is ticking up
[Music]
it's so funny I feel like I'm like you
know a little bit like all of a sudden I
am going to buy one of those things
though we have a closing tradition okay
which is the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to leave be leaving it
for
the question left for you very simple
what is it that drives you to be the
best version of you
curiosity
that's all that's the only thing that
not the only thing but the main thing
that I wake up in the morning I'm
excited to take on the day because I
have the luxury of having a job that
allows me to be curious I've had a lot
of jobs that did not allow me to be
curious but I'm able to ask questions
and have conversations and it's every
day is uh is a privilege because of that
well I think from reading this book as I
said this is the book that has sat on my
bedside on my girlfriend's side for the
last I think a year roughly since we
moved into that new place you've done a
phenomenally great job of condensing the
information to make it accessible
um and relatable to every type of reader
out there but it's so
it's like a light every other page
there's almost like a light bulb that's
being switched on in my head about the
way that I'm living my life and how
small simple things that as you say
aren't complex I don't need to buy some
huge course or I don't need to become a
master in anything can have a
fundamental change in my life and that's
why this book is so unbelievably
important but I mean the book speaks for
itself because this book is sold like
absolutely crazy and it's one of those
books that is being driven by Word of
Mouth one person is passing it to
another you know I can talk through the
people in my team in the web of how the
book traveled and Jemima and then Merlin
and Sophie and so on and I think that
speaks to this book I think it's fun
it's a shame it's a real shame that I
actually believe that this book is now
required reading but it speaks to the
misalignment problem and how far we've
gotten from good habits as it relates to
breathing and the consequences that that
it's had on our health I'm very excited
to see the BBC Maestro series as well
I'll be checking out looking out for
that because I love the series and they
provide as you say an actionable toolkit
for a lot of the things we're talking
about today I love the way you approach
subject matters I love the impartiality
of it I love the fact that you lead with
the evidence first
um and as you've done throughout this
conversation you try and keep your
opinion secondary to what the evidence
is saying um which I think is really
important and a lot of people actually
they get quite scared of what the
evidence is saying so they either avoid
it or um they don't mention it at all
but you you hold that line really really
well your work is going to help so many
people I cannot I can't imagine millions
and millions of people that you'll never
get to meet so on behalf of all of those
people including my girlfriend as I said
she started Studio upstairs called Bali
breath work because in part because of
what you wrote so afterwards I'd just
love to show you it but um just so you
can see it because you it's it's an
example for you of all the lives that
you'll never meet that your work is
touching you'll never you'll never get
to meet you know you'd probably if we
hadn't met today you wouldn't even know
there was a studio that had launched in
London because of your work or there was
someone that's dedicated their life now
to helping people with breath because of
your work so
um on behalf of all those people you'll
never meet thank you James your work is
very necessary and I can't wait to see
what you write about next I'm very
intrigued I heard there's a book on the
way very excited by that
thank you very much for having me
as you guys may know we are a sponsor of
this podcast and I'm a shareholder in
the company as someone that is on the go
pretty much 90 of the time I always
prioritize getting my workout in and for
me it's a non-negotiable working out
staying healthy and trying to optimize
my body so I can achieve the results
that I want but a new addition to my
lifestyle which complements my busy work
schedule and my tough workout schedule
is my prioritization of my rest and my
recovery I never quite knew how
important it was until I started my woop
journey to understand exactly what's
going on in my body and how to look
after my body moop is a wearable health
and wellness coach that provides you
with the feedback and actionable
insights you need on your sleep your
recovery your training your stress and
your overall health and seeing this data
that we provides has made it 10 times
easier to understand what my body needs
for it to reach its optimal State
helping me to conquer those long days
and tough workouts without breaking down
see for yourself by searching
join.woop.com
CEO to get a free month free week
membership on me and I have a suspicion
you'll stick with it because I certainly
have and I don't stick with much as it
relates to wearable tech enjoy it and
let me know how you get on
[Music]
foreign